Q: Decribe Aristotle Classification system?
A: Aristotle classify plants? Trees, shrubs, herbs and classify animals? : Those with red blood and those without

Q: Who developed the Two Kingdom system?
A: Linnaeus : Plantae and Animalia

Q: Who proposed the Five Kingdom Classification & in which year?
A: R.H. Whittaker 1969

Q: What are the five kingdoms proposed by Whittaker?
A: Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae, Animalia

Q: What are the main criteria used by Whittaker for classification?
A: Cell structure, body organisation, mode of nutrition, reproduction, phylogenetic relationships

Q: What organisms are included in Kingdom Monera?
A: Bacteria

Q: What are the four categories of bacteria based on shape?
A: Coccus, Bacillus, Vibrium, Spirillum

Q: What are the three types of Archaebacteria?
A: Halophiles, thermoacidophiles, methanogens

Q: What is another name for cyanobacteria?
A: Blue-green algae

Q: Give examples of cyanobacteria that fix atmospheric nitrogen.
A: Nostoc, Anabaena

Q: What are specialised cells in cyanobacteria for nitrogen fixation?
A: Heterocysts

Q: What organisms completely lack a cell wall and are the smallest living cells?
A: Mycoplasma

Q: What are examples of diseases caused by bacteria?
A: Cholera, citrus canker

Q: How do bacteria mainly reproduce?
A: Fission

Q: What groups are included in Kingdom Protista?
A: Chrysophytes, Dinoflagellates, Euglenoids, Slime moulds, Protozoans

Q: What are chrysophytes?
A: Diatoms and golden algae (desmids)

Q: What is diatomaceous earth?
A: Accumulation of diatom cell wall deposits

Q: Give an example of a euglenoid.
A: Euglena

Q: What is the aggregation formed by slime moulds under suitable conditions?
A: Plasmodium

Q: What are the four major groups of protozoans?
A: Amoeboid, Flagellated, Ciliated, Sporozoans

Q: Give an example of an amoeboid protozoan.
A: Amoeba

Q: Give an example of a flagellated protozoan and the deasies with it.
A: Trypanosoma Causing Sleeping sickness

Q: Give an example of a ciliated protozoan.
A: Paramoecium

Q: Give an example of a sporozoan.
A: Plasmodium - Malaria

Q: What are examples of common fungi?
A: yeast, Penicillium

Q: Give an example of a unicellular fungus used in bread and beer.
A: Yeast

Q: Give an example of a fungus causing wheat rust.
A: Puccinia

Q: Give an example of a fungus source of antibiotics.
A: Penicillium it different from Paramoecium ( cilliated protozoan )

Q: What are the thread-like structures in fungi?
A: Hyphae

Q: What is the network of hyphae called?
A: Mycelium

Q: What are hyphae with multinucleated cytoplasm called?
A: Coenocytic hyphae

Q: What is the cell wall of fungi composed of?
A: Chitin and polysaccharides

Q: What are fungi that absorb from dead substrates called?
A: Saprophytes

Q: What are symbiotic associations of fungi with algae?
A: Lichens

Q: What are symbiotic associations of fungi with roots of higher plants?
A: Mycorrhiza

Q: What are the vegetative means of reproduction in fungi?
A: Fragmentation, fission, budding

Q: What are the asexual spores in fungi?
A: Conidia, sporangiospores, zoospores

Q: What are the sexual spores in fungi?
A: Oospores, ascospores, basidiospores

Q: Explan the repoductive cycle of fungi, point its main events?
A: Plasmogamy, dikaryotic, Karyogamy, organism, Spores

Q: In which fungi does dikaryophase occur?
A: Ascomycetes and basidiomycetes

Q: What are the classes of Kingdom Fungi?
A: Phycomycetes, Ascomycetes, Basidiomycetes, Deuteromycetes

Q: Give examples of Phycomycetes.
A: Rhizopus

Q: What type of mycelium in Phycomycetes?
A: Aseptate and coenocytic

Q: What are asexual spores in Phycomycetes?
A: Zoospores (motile), aplanospores (non-motile)

Q: What are sexual spores in Phycomycetes?
A: Zygospore

Q: Another name for Ascomycetes?
A: Sac-fungi

Q: Give examples of Ascomycetes.
A: Aspergillus

Q: What are asexual spores in Ascomycetes?
A: Conidia

Q: What are sexual spores in Ascomycetes?
A: Ascospores

Q: What are fruiting bodies in Ascomycetes?
A: Ascocarps

Q: Give examples of Basidiomycetes.
A: Agaricus (mushroom)

Q: What are sexual spores in Basidiomycetes?
A: Basidiospores

Q: What are fruiting bodies in Basidiomycetes?
A: Basidiocarps

Q: Another name for Deuteromycetes?
A: Imperfect fungi

Q: What groups are included in Kingdom Plantae?
A: Algae, bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms, angiosperms

Q: What is the phenomenon called in plant life cycle?
A: Alternation of generations

Q: Give examples of partially heterotrophic plants in Plantae.
A: Venus fly trap (insectivorous), Cuscuta (parasite)

Q: What is the mode of nutrition in Kingdom Animalia?
A: Holozoic

Q: What does "Contagium vivum fluidum" mean?
A: Infectious living fluid

Q: What is the protein coat of viruses called?
A: Capsid and subunits of capsid are Capsomeres

Q: Give examples of viral diseases in humans.
A: small pox, influenza, AIDS

Q: What are prions?
A: Abnormally folded proteins causing infectious neurological diseases

Q: Give examples of diseases caused by prions.
A: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease)

Q: What is the algal component in lichens?
A: Phycobiont

Q: What is the fungal component in lichens?
A: Mycobiont

Q: What are lichens good indicators of and how?
A: Pollution (do not grow in polluted areas)